In the last video,
I discussed creating constructors, or allowing the compiler
to create a default constructor for us.
In this video, I want to talk more about constructors.
The first example is going to demonstrate
why you might want to create a class
with no public or package constructors,
but only a private constructor.
I'll be talking a lot about access modifiers
in an upcoming video,
but the private constructor is an interesting test case.
So we're going to start by creating a new class
in our methods project.
We're going to call it RestrictedObjects.
In this code, we're actually creating a class
called OnlyClass as you can see on screen there.
It's only got one constructor,
which has been marked as private.
I'm creating an instance of this class,
and assign it to a private static final class field.
I'm creating a method to return this instance,
which is the only instance.
You might recognise this as a singleton pattern
if you've been programming for a while.
Now I'm creating public methods
that wrap the instance's private method.
And the main method down at the bottom there
of RestrictedObjects, which is the second class
in this for our executed method on the one and only instance
for our static public method.
So I'm running this now.
Only one instance of this class exists or will ever exist.
Now, so far so good.
That's something that you certainly will see in code,
a singleton pattern.
But what happens when we try to get around this restriction
by creating our own class that extends this class?
So let's try and do that right down the bottom here.
We're gonna try and add another class.
We're going to type class MyOnlyClass extends OnlyClass,
and left and right curly braces to make it valid.
You can see immediately we've got it compiled over there
and if we hover over it,
there's no default constructor available in OnlyClass.
And what's actually happening here
is that you cannot actually extend a class
that only has private constructors,
except as a nested class.
Even though the error doesn't really specifically say that
in this instance.
If I comment that out, and we come down here instead,
after the OnlyClass.doSomething, paste some code in.
So we've got the same problem here,
and actually in this case we've got a better error message.
OnlyClass has private access in OnlyClass.
Basically, you can extend a class
that only has private constructors,
and again we're getting a more realistic
error message this time.
All right, I'm just going to quorate that line out as well.
Okay, so how is a class with a private constructor
different from a final class?
Well, let's explore that question with some code.
You're gonna create another class here.
We're gonna call this one FinalClassExample.
Now this code, firstly defines the class called FinalEntity
that has a constructor, a method, and an instance variable
which you can see on screen.
And the main method from the FinalClassExample class,
the second class in this fold
instantiates a couple of objects of top FinalEntity
and executing method on h.
Pretty straightforward code.
Run the code.
So you can see that the fact that we've marked
this FinalEntity class as final
doesn't prevent moldable instances being created.
But what it does prevent
is the entity being extended any further.
Now perhaps you have a logical end
to your hierarchical structure,
and it doesn't make sense to allow a subclass to exist,
so that would be a good reason to make the entity final.
All right, so let's compare the final class
with a class that has a final method.
So we're going to create a new class
called FinalMethodExample.
Okay, so there's the code.
So firstly, we have to find an abstract class
on line nine called WillHaveManySubTypes.
This class has two abstract methods as you can see there,
that have to be implemented by classes that extend it.
But it also has one method that is not extensible,
because it's marked final
and cannot be overridden by any subclass.
Every subclass that uses this particular method
has to execute the same code.
Just going on down, we've got our public host
down the bottom, second class in this fold
that extends the abstract class as you can see,
and implements the two methods.
And the main method, going back up again,
instantiates an object of it's own top
and executes the three methods,
but also prints the object to the console.
Let's run this.
And there's the output at the bottom of the screen.
All right, so let's try overriding the doZOnlyOneWay method
just to confirm that we can't do it.
So again, we're trying to override
the method on line 16 there.
We're gonna paste this code
into FinalMethodExample right down the bottom.
We'll do it, it's very last method.
You can see doZOnlyOneWay cannot override,
override method is final.
All right, so let's comment that out.
All right, so let's try something else here.
Let's see what happens if you don't set a method to final
and it's use is universal in your code
and you've allowed others to extend it.
So we've gone back up
and as another abstract method definition
up here in our abstract class, we've got a toString there.
Now we're gonna be forced to implement it
in the FinalMethodExample.
You can see that if we don't at the moment,
we're actually getting an error there that must be declared
abstract or implement abstract method toString.
So let's go and implement toString.
The error has now disappeared as you can see.
Run the code.
Not implemented yet is the output,
which is consistent with what we've added
to our toString method.
So why is this a problem?
Well it's only a problem if you ever
actually want this object to be able
to use java.lang.Object implementation of toString.
There's now no way for this class to execute it.
And to see what I mean,
if I go back to here and change this,
return super.toString, you get an error.
Abstract method toString cannot be accessed directly.
You'd think that in this scenario
it should actually execute the objects toString method,
but it doesn't and it doesn't compile as you can see there.
Basically, it's trying to execute the parent class's
toString method, but it's parent is the abstract class
that we defined at the top there with an abstract method
toString because the parent is the class.
In this case, the class will have many subtops.
What I'm saying is the abstract class overrode
and hid the java.lang.Object toString method
which may not have been your intention.
But if there is application code you really do not want
subclasses to extend or alter,
you want to certainly wrap it in a FinalMethod.
All right, so I'm just going to comment that change out.
We're gonna uncomment this one again, so code compiles.
Run it to make sure, and we're good to go.
Okay. All right, that's the end of this video.
Coming up, we've got a small quiz.
Good luck with that,
and then I'll see you in the video following that.